West Virginia V. EPA: The “Major Questions Doctrine” and its Effect on Environmental Legal Protections 


Jess Chisholm ‘27

Spring 2024


Abstract
In the 2022 West Virginia v. Environmental Protection Agency case, the United States Supreme Court ruled that the EPA had overstepped its authority in its regulation of greenhouse gasses through the Clean Power Plan. The case is important both for its legal implications and its environmental effects. The decision was a major showcase of the “major questions doctrine”, a legal doctrine based on the idea that significant federal agency policy decisions must be specifically legislated by Congress. Despite existing as a theory for over twenty years, this was the most substantial use of the doctrine in terms of its effect on federal environmental policy. The impact of the legal precedence provided by the case will be perhaps the most important effect of the decision, as it implements a substantial limitation on environmental regulation. This journal is intended to analyze the case, its application of the major questions doctrine, and its social and political implications. While the use of the major questions doctrine had some basis in precedence, the dismantling of the EPA’s ability to regulate emissions was an overstepping of the court’s power, went against both previous Supreme Court decisions and congressional authorization, and was highly detrimental to the United States’ fight against climate change and to future environmental litigation. 

I. Introduction
Environmental protection, specifically regarding controlling climate change, has become increasingly litigated. As climate litigation increases in frequency worldwide, the reservoir of legal precedent grows, forming a well-defined field of law. “The total number of climate change cases worldwide has more than doubled since the first report on the issue, from 884 in 2017 to 2,180 in 2022.”[1] As the effects of climate change become more prominent, cases involving environmental regulations become more important. The United States has exemplified this trend; a strong understanding of U.S. environmental legal standards has become key to having a well-rounded understanding of U.S. law in general. In recent years, no case has impacted national climate policy and litigation more than the Supreme Court’s 2022 West Virginia v. Environmental Protection Agency. The journal will consist of four following subsections. The next will examine the case’s background. The third section will discuss the majority decision, past cases, and the dissenting opinion. In the fourth section, I will analyze the case with my view and its implications, finishing with a brief conclusion in the fifth. 
II. Background
Before discussing the case, context dating back over 50 years is necessary. Codified in 1970, the Clean Air Act passed by Congress continues to be “the comprehensive federal law that regulates air emissions from stationary and mobile sources.”[2] In 2015, the Obama Administration established the Clean Power Plan, an EPA policy that regulated carbon dioxide emissions.[3] The EPA used Section 111 of the Clean Air Act as the basis for this plan, which “directs EPA to regulate stationary sources of any substance that ‘causes, or contributes significantly to, air pollution.’”[4] This section allowed the EPA to determine emission limits for states from the federal level.[5] The Clean Power Plan “was projected to lower greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from existing power plants 32% from 2005 levels by 2030.”[6] The biggest way in which the Clean Power Plan would reduce emissions is through generational shifting, which is an EPA policy that requires “a shift in electricity production from certain fossil fuel power generation sources, primarily fired by coal and natural gas, to other sources that emit less carbon dioxide.”[7] The “generational shifting” form of regulation would be perhaps the most controversial aspect of the plan. The Trump administration repealed the Clean Power Plan, replacing it with the significantly less strict Affordable Clean Energy Rule. This rule was projected to reduce carbon emissions by just 0.7% by 2030.[8] However, in 2021, “The U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit decided unanimously to toss the Environmental Protection Agency's Affordable Clean Energy rule”, rendering it unable to be enforced.[9] The appeals court “held that EPA’s ‘repeal of the Clean Power Plan rested critically on a mistaken reading of the Clean Air Act’—namely, that generation shifting cannot be a ‘system of emission reduction.’”[10] After the Court of Appeals decision, “States and private entities— including petitioners here West Virginia, North Dakota, Westmoreland Mining Holdings LLC, and The North American Coal Corporation (NACC)” filed petitions to defend the Affordable Clean Energy rule and repeal the Clean Power Plan.[11] When the Supreme Court accepted the petitions, the case officially began. 
III. Rulings
The question presented in the writ of certiorari that the court needed to decide on was as follows: “In 42 U.S.C. § 7411(d), an ancillary provision of the Clean Air Act, did Congress constitutionally authorize the Environmental Protection Agency to issue significant rules—including those capable of reshaping the nation’s electricity grids and unilaterally decarbonizing virtually any sector of the economy—without any limits on what the agency can require so long as it considers cost, non-air impacts, and energy requirements?”[12] The case focused on the extent to which the Clean Air Act can be used to regulate emissions, including through generational shifting. In the 6-3 decision, the justices held that “Congress did not grant EPA in Section 111(d) of the Clean Air Act the authority to devise emissions caps based on the generation shifting approach the agency took in the Clean Power Plan.”[13] Essentially, the justices ruled that the EPA’s regulation exceeded the authorization given in the Clean Air Act. They sustained that “administrative agencies must point to clear congressional authorization when they issue economically or politically significant regulations.”[14] This legal perspective is known as the major question’s doctrine. In the United States, the federal bureaucracy’s power exists through congressional authorization. Typically, congress “delegates authority to agencies to regulate particular aspects of society, in general, or broad terms.”[15] This broad delegation has allowed federal agencies to make internal decisions regarding major policy issues they oversee. In this example, the EPA used this broad authority that it claimed was given by the Clean Air Act to regulate emissions. This is where the Supreme Court’s major questions doctrine comes in. Through this doctrine, the six Supreme Court judges making up the majority argued that specific, not broad, authorization from Congress is needed for major policy decisions made by federal agencies. The major questions doctrine has been used in several recent Supreme Court cases, many unrelated to environmental issues. For example, it has been used in cases ranging from tariffs to tobacco regulation to eviction moratoriums.[16] The premise dates back to the 1994 MCI Telecommunications Corp. v. AT&T case, whose opinion “laid the groundwork for what has become known as the major questions doctrine.”[17] The implication of this legal doctrine is perhaps the most important repercussion of this case; it severely restricts the ability of federal agencies to enact major policy decisions without specific congressional approval. Furthermore, the decision impacts all areas where federal agencies hold power, not just environmental law. The case shows the current Roberts court as supportive of the doctrine, heralding that future cases regarding agency power will likely have similar conclusions with the current court. 
Despite the previous application of the major questions doctrine, the majority decision reversed previous decisions, limited congressional authorization, and rolled back important environmental protections. The Supreme Court’s decision showcased a significant departure from the court’s 2008 Massachusetts v. EPA decision: the court ruled 5-4 that “the Clean Air Act allows the Environmental Protection Agency to regulate greenhouse gasses because they qualify as air pollutants.”[18] In his majority opinion in the Massachusetts case, John Paul Stevens stated that “there is nothing counterintuitive to the notion that the EPA can curtail the emission of substances that are putting the global climate out of kilter.”[19] In West Virginia, the court found the opposite. Also important to note is that John Roberts, the current chief justice, wrote the dissenting opinion for the Massachusetts case and the majority opinion for West Virginia. Today's more conservative court reversed the previous decision and restricted, rather than expanded, federal environmental protections.
Justice Elena Kagan provides a rather scathing dissent in West Virginia v. EPA. She writes that “the limits the majority now puts on EPA’s authority fly in the face of the statute Congress wrote.”[20] Kagan argues that Congressional authorization for generational shifting was given “when it broadly authorized EPA in Section 111 to select the “best system of emission reduction” for power plants.”[21] Kagan also criticizes the majority’s use of the major questions doctrine, arguing that it “replaces normal text-in-context statutory interpretation with some tougher-to-satisfy set of rules.”[22] She argues that the majority was not following precedent in its decision, as the cases they cited as promoting the major questions doctrine involved substantially different situations in which agencies worked outside of their bounds. “In each case, the Court thought, the agency had strayed out of its lane, to an area where it had neither expertise nor experience.”[23] Kagan asserts regarding West Virginia v. EPA: “This is not the Attorney General regulating medical care, or even the CDC regulating landlord-tenant relations. It is EPA (that’s the Environmental Protection Agency, in case the majority forgot) acting to address the greatest environmental challenge of our time.”[24] This case did not involve an agency regulating an area it did not have authority over. She further argues that the majority has overstepped its bounds in its decision by determining that “the court, rather than Congress, will decide how much regulation is too much.”[25] 
IV. Analysis and Implications
It is clear that Congress granted authority to the EPA to determine the best way to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. When the EPA created a plan to significantly reduce emissions, the court ruled against it in a highly unnecessary intervention. By declaring that the EPA could not use its power to promote generational shifting, the court effectively gave itself power over the agency and Congress. The decision removed power from the experts in the field, relocating it to the Supreme Court justices. This use of the major questions doctrine curtails the essence of congressionally authorized regulation. The intention of congressional authorization, including the one given in the Clean Air Act, is to delegate broad authority to the agencies and allow the experts in the agency to regulate its industry. However, in its decision, the SCOTUS majority decided to intervene and require extensive Congressional approval of specific regulations. 
The negative environmental effects of the decision are substantial. “When promulgating the Clean Power Plan, EPA estimated that improved air quality resulting from a 32% reduction in GHG emissions by 2030 would each year prevent 3600 premature deaths, 1700 heart attacks, 90 000 asthma attacks, and 300 000 missed school and work days, yielding a yearly economic benefit of $34 billion.”[26] The court’s intervention in the EPA’s regulation will likely cost lives through pollution and worsen the United States’s fight against climate change. Fortunately, much of the negative environmental effects of the decision were reversed by the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA). The Biden administration’s signature environmental bill, it was “designed in anticipation of the Court’s new demands, the IRA amends the Clean Air Act to provide a clear and contemporary statement that greenhouse gasses are air pollutants and to direct the EPA to issue new standards.”[27] To avoid the major questions doctrine criticism and the limitations it brought to the EPA’s regulations after the ruling, the Biden administration used the IRA to clearly assert congressional approval of pollutant regulation; the Supreme Court could no longer argue that Congress had not given express authority for the regulation the administration wanted to advance. The passing of the IRA significantly weakens the West Virginia v. EPA decision’s environmental impact, as it largely halts any detrimental effects of regulation barriers on air pollution. Thus, the greatest impact of the West Virginia decision is not that on the environment, but rather that on the legal precedent for future cases.
V. Conclusion
Overall, the West Virginia v. EPA decision marks a key usage of the major questions doctrine in environmental law that will continue to influence future Supreme Court decisions. Since this ruling, the Supreme Court has continued to curtail environmental regulations: in a 9-0 decision for Sackett vs Environmental Protection Agency (2023), the court “established a more stringent test to determine whether the Clean Water Act applies to a wetland,” a hefty blow to the EPA.[28] It seems apparent that the court has taken new approach regarding federal environmental regulation by removing autonomy from federal agencies. The major questions doctrine, for better or for worse, will continue to significantly affect the range and power of federal regulation. 



Works Cited

“Climate Litigation More than Doubles in Five Years, Now a Key Tool in Delivering Climate Justice.” UN Environment, July 27, 2023. https://www.unep.org/news-and-stories/press-release/climate-litigation-more-doubles-five-years-now-key-tool-delivering. 

“Summary of the Clean Air Act.” EPA. Accessed April 8, 2024. https://www.epa.gov/laws-regulations/summary-clean-air-act. 

‌West Virginia v. Environmental Protection Agency, 597 U.S. 3 (2022)

Ibid., 2

“Summary of the Clean Air Act.” EPA. Accessed April 8, 2024. https://www.epa.gov/laws-regulations/summary-clean-air-act. 

“Regulating Greenhouse Gases from Existing Power Plants-the Clean Power Plan, Affordable Clean Energy Rule, & 2023 Power Plant Rules - Harvard Law School.” Harvard Law School - Environmental & Energy Law Program, March 4, 2024. https://eelp.law.harvard.edu/2017/09/clean-power-plan-carbon-pollution-emission-guidelines/. 

Kerschner, Seth, Taylor Pullins, and Laura Mulry. “Supreme Court Rules EPA Cannot Require Existing Fossil Fuel Power Facilities to Shift to Lower CO2 Emitting Sources of Electricity.” White & Case LLP, July 1, 2022. https://www.whitecase.com/insight-alert/supreme-court-rules-epa-cannot-require-existing-fossil-fuel-power-facilities-shift#article-content. 

“Regulating Greenhouse Gases from Existing Power Plants-the Clean Power Plan, Affordable Clean Energy Rule, & 2023 Power Plant Rules - Harvard Law School.” Harvard Law School - Environmental & Energy Law Program, March 4, 2024. https://eelp.law.harvard.edu/2017/09/clean-power-plan-carbon-pollution-emission-guidelines/. 
Amy Howe, Supreme Court curtails Clean Water Act, SCOTUSblog (May. 25, 2023), https://www.scotusblog.com/2023/05/supreme-court-curtails-clean-water-act/.

Volcovici, Valerie. “U.S. Court Deals Final Blow to Trump Epa’s Clean Power Rule Replacement.” Reuters, January 19, 2021. https://www.reuters.com/business/sustainable-business/us-court-deals-final-blow-trump-epas-clean-power-rule-replacement-2021-01-19/. 

‌West Virginia v. Environmental Protection Agency, 597 U.S. 3 (2022)

Ibid., 12

Ibid. 

Ibid., 4

Louis J. Capozzi III, "ARTICLE: The Past and Future of the Major Questions Doctrine," Ohio State Law Journal, 84, 191 (2023). https://advance.lexis.com/api/document?collection=analytical-materials&id=urn:contentItem:68D7-YYB1-DYRW-V4YD-00000-00&context=1516831.

“The Major Questions Doctrine.” 2022. https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF12077.

Ibid. 

Griffith, Thomas, and Haley Proctor. 2021. “Deference, Delegation, and Divination: Justice Breyer and the Future of the Major Questions Doctrine.” www.yalelawjournal.org. November 21, 2021. https://www.yalelawjournal.org/forum/deference-delegation-and-divination. 

Massachusetts v. EPA, 549 U.S. 497 (2007)

Ibid. 

‌West Virginia v. Environmental Protection Agency, 597 U.S. 3 (2022)

Ibid., 4
Ibid., 15
Ibid., 19
Ibid., 20-21
Ibid., 32

Kizer, Kenneth W, Frederica P Perera, and Kari C Nadeau. 2022. “Health Implications of the West Virginia v Environmental Protection Agency US Supreme Court Decision.” The Lancet Planetary Health 6 (11): e847–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/s2542-5196(22)00249-2.

Doniger, David. “WEST VIRGINIA, THE INFLATION REDUCTION ACT, AND THE FUTURE OF CLIMATE POLICY.” Environmental Law Institute, n.d. https://www.eli.org/sites/default/files/files-pdf/Doniger%20Feature%20July%202023.pdf. 

Amy Howe, Supreme Court curtails Clean Water Act, SCOTUSblog (May. 25, 2023), https://www.scotusblog.com/2023/05/supreme-court-curtails-clean-water-act/.


